---
title: 'TIGRA: A Targeted Iterative Graph Routing Assembler for Breakpoint Assembly'
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
[TIGRA: A Targeted Iterative Graph Routing Assembler for breakpoint assembly](
http://genome.cshlp.org/content/early/2013/12/04/gr.162883.113.abstract?papeto
c)
<!--more-->

(h/t: @sebhtml)

> Recent progress in next-generation sequencing has greatly facilitated our
study of genomic structural variation. Unlike single nucleotide variants and
small indels, many structural variants have not been completely characterized
at the nucleotide resolution. Deriving the complete sequences underlying such
breakpoints is crucial for not only accurate discovery, but also the
functional characterization of altered alleles. However, our current ability
to determine such breakpoint sequences is limited because of challenges in
aligning and assembling short reads. To address this issue, we developed a
targeted iterative graph routing assembler, TIGRA, which implements a set of
novel data analysis routines to achieve effective breakpoint assembly from
next-generation sequencing data. In our assessment using data from the 1000
Genomes Project, TIGRA was able to accurately assemble the majority of
deletion and mobile element insertion breakpoints, with a substantively better
success rate and accuracy than other algorithms. TIGRA has been applied in the
1000 Genomes Project and other projects, and **is freely available for
academic use**.

From the abstract, it seems like an interesting paper. Wish we could say more,
but the paper is locked up right now. We do not understand what pleasure these
researchers get in doing all these hard work and locking up their papers in
inaccessible journals.

A little more from the supplement -

> TIGRA is a computer program that performs targeted local assembly of
structural variant (SV) breakpoints from next generation sequencing short-read
data. It takes as input a list of putative SV calls and a set of bam files
that contain reads mapped to a reference genome such as NCBI build36. For each
SV call, it assembles the set of reads that were mapped or partially mapped to
the region of interest (ROI) in the corresponding bam files. Instead of
outputing a single consensus sequence, tigra attempts to construct all the
alternative alleles in the ROI as long as they received sufficient sequence
coverage (usually >= 2x). It also utilizes the variant type information in the
input files to select reads for assembly. Tigra is effective at improving the
SV prediction accuracy and resolution in short reads analysis and can produce
accurate breakpoint sequences that are useful to understand the origin,
mechanism and pathology underlying the SVs.

