---
title: Bayesian Genome Assembly and Assessment by Markov Chain Monte Carlo Sampling
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Although 5,386 bp bacteriophage genome is minuscule in size, readers may find
concepts [presented in the following paper](http://www.plosone.org/article/inf
o%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0099497) useful.
<!--more-->

> Most genome assemblers construct point estimates, choosing only a single
genome sequence from among many alternative hypotheses that are supported by
the data. We present a Markov chain Monte Carlo approach to sequence assembly
that instead generates distributions of assembly hypotheses with posterior
probabilities, providing an explicit statistical framework for evaluating
alternative hypotheses and assessing assembly uncertainty. We implement this
approach in a prototype assembler, called Genome Assembly by Bayesian
Inference (GABI), and illustrate its application to the bacteriophage X174.
Our sampling strategy achieves both good mixing and convergence on Illumina
test data for X174, demonstrating the feasibility of our approach. We
summarize the posterior distribution of assembly hypotheses generated by GABI
as a majority-rule consensus assembly. Then we compare the posterior
distribution to external assemblies of the same test data, and annotate those
assemblies by assigning posterior probabilities to features that are in common
with GABIs assembly graph. GABI is freely available under a GPL license from
https://bitbucket.org/mhowison/gabi.

In this context, an earlier paper by Rahman and Pachter is worth taking a look
at.

[CGAL: computing genome assembly
likelihoods](http://genomebiology.com/2013/14/1/R8)

> Assembly algorithms have been extensively benchmarked using simulated data
so that results can be compared to ground truth. However, in de novo assembly,
only crude metrics such as contig number and size are typically used to
evaluate assembly quality. We present CGAL, a novel likelihood-based approach
to assembly assessment in the absence of a ground truth. We show that
likelihood is more accurate than other metrics currently used for evaluating
assemblies, and describe its application to the optimization and comparison of
assembly algorithms. Our methods are implemented in software that is freely
available at http://bio.math.berkeley.edu/cgal/ webcite.

We should also note that advanced assemblers like SPAdes have their built-in
statistical evaluation methods for scaffolding step, which is usually the most
error-prone.

