---
title: PacBio  P4-C2, P5-C3, etc. - What Do They Mean?
categories:
- chem
---
We had been pondering about those cryptic terms and found by asking some
people around that the P stands for
[polymerase](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%CE%A629_DNA_polymerase) and C
stands for chemistry. Therefore, P4-C2 means polymerase of fourth generation
and chemistry of second generation.
<!--more-->

**Polymerase**

That got us curious about what the actual DNA polymerase sequences are for
2nd, 3rd or 4th generation. Everyone else told us that those would be top
secret information at PacBio and as unavailable as Coca-Cola formula. We do
not like to take no for an answer, and had to contact [our friendly NSA
collaborator](http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/19/us-tech-giants-
knew-nsa-data-collection-rajesh-de) to get to the deepest secrets from the
company. Here is what we found. [This document](https://www.google.com/patents
/US8420366?dq=pacific+biosciences&hl=en&sa=X&ei=5e9mUuPVOMXbiwK2yoGoBQ&ved=0CG
AQ6AEwBjgK) explains various polymerase sequences -

> Provided are compositions comprising recombinant DNA polymerases that
include amino acid substitutions, insertions, deletions and/or heterologous or
exogenous features that confer modified properties upon the polymerase for
enhanced single molecule sequencing.

> Compositions that include modified recombinant DNA polymerases that include
amino acid substitutions, insertions, deletions and/or heterologous or
exogenous features that confer modified properties upon the polymerase for
enhanced single molecule sequencing are a feature of the invention. Relative
to a wild-type ?29 DNA polymerase, these modifications can include any one of,
or any combination of: an L253 mutation and a mutation at one or more of T368,
E375, A484, or K512; an E375 and K512 mutation, and a mutation at one or more
of L253, T368 or A484; an I93 mutation; an S215 mutation; an E420 mutation; a
P477 mutation; a D66R mutation; a K135R mutation; a K138R mutation; an L253T
mutation; a Y369G mutation; a Y369L mutation; an L384M mutation; a K422A
mutation; an I504R mutation; an E508K mutation; an E508R mutation; a D510K
mutation; or at least one mutation or combination of mutations selected from
those listed in Tables 6, 9 and 10. The modified polymerases can exhibit
desirable features described in detail hereinbelow, e.g., reduced reaction
rates at one or more steps of the polymerase kinetic cycle, decreased
branching fractions, increased closed complex stability, enhanced metal ion
coordination and/or reduced exonuclease activity, etc.

There is lot more in the document to keep a biochemist busy for his entire
lifetime.

**Chemistry**

How about chemistry? Our friendly NSA collaborator took us to the following
top-secret documents -

[Phospholink nucleotides for sequencing applications](https://www.google.com/p
atents/US20130122490?dq=pacific+biosciences&hl=en&sa=X&ei=APBmUsnzJKjmiwLym4H4
Ag&ved=0CGAQ6AEwBjgU)

> The present invention provides labeled phospholink nucleotides that can be
used in place of naturally occurring nucleotide triphosphates or other analogs
in template directed nucleic acid synthesis reactions and other nucleic acid
reactions and various analyses based thereon, including DNA sequencing, single
base identification, hybridization assays, and others.

[Recombinant Polymerases With Increased Phototolerance](https://www.google.com
/patents/US20130217007?dq=pacific+biosciences&hl=en&sa=X&ei=APBmUsnzJKjmiwLym4
H4Ag&ved=0CHUQ6AEwCTgU)

> Provided are compositions comprising recombinant DNA polymerases that
include amino acid substitutions, insertions, deletions, and/or exogenous
features that confer modified properties upon the polymerase for enhanced
single molecule sequencing. Such properties include increased resistance to
photodamage, and can also include enhanced metal ion coordination, reduced
exonuclease activity, reduced reaction rates at one or more steps of the
polymerase kinetic cycle, decreased branching fraction, altered cofactor
selectivity, increased yield, increased thermostability, increased accuracy,
increased speed, increased readlength, and the like. Also provided are nucleic
acids which encode the polymerases with the aforementioned phenotypes, as well
as methods of using such polymerases to make a DNA or to sequence a DNA
template.

[Method for sequencing using branching fraction of incorporatable nucleotides]
(https://www.google.com/patents/US8530164?dq=pacific+biosciences&hl=en&sa=X&ei
=v-9mUvCpCMr2iwKa9ID4Cg&ved=0CHkQ6AEwCQ)

> Provided are methods for enhanced sequencing of nucleic acid templates. Also
provided are reaction conditions that increase branching fractions during
polymerization reactions. Also provided are compositions comprising modified
recombinant polymerases that exhibit branching fractions that are higher than
the branching fractions of the polymerases from which they were derived.
Provided are compositions comprising modified recombinant polymerases that
exhibit delayed translocation relative to the polymerases from which they were
derived. Also provided are compositions comprising modified recombinant
polymerases that exhibit increased nucleotide or nucleotide analog residence
time at an active site of the polymerase. Provided are methods for generating
polymerases with the aforementioned phenotypes and methods of using such
polymerases to sequence a DNA template or make a DNA. Also provided are
methods and nucleic acid sequencing systems for determining which labeled
nucleotide is incorporated at a site during a template-dependent
polymerization reaction.

[Isolation of polymerase-nucleic acid complexes](https://www.google.com/patent
s/US20120322666?dq=pacific+biosciences&hl=en&sa=X&ei=O_BmUqmwJ4q-
igKbk4GYDQ&ved=0CD0Q6AEwATgo)

> Compositions, methods and systems are provided for the isolation of
polymerase-nucleic acid complexes. Complexes can be separated from free enzyme
by using hook molecules to target single stranded regions on the nucleic acid.
Active complexes can be isolated from mixtures having both active and inactive
complexes by initiating nucleic acid synthesis so as to open up a portion of a
double stranded region rendering that region single stranded. Hook molecules
are targeted to bind the sequences that are thus exposed. The hook molecules
bound to active polymerase-nucleic acid complex are isolated, and the active
polymerase-nucleic acid complexes released.

[Generation of modified polymerases for improved accuracy in single molecule s
equencing](https://www.google.com/patents/US8420366?dq=pacific+biosciences&hl=
en&sa=X&ei=5e9mUuPVOMXbiwK2yoGoBQ&ved=0CGAQ6AEwBjgK)

> Provided are compositions comprising recombinant DNA polymerases that
include amino acid substitutions, insertions, deletions and/or heterologous or
exogenous features that confer modified properties upon the polymerase for
enhanced single molecule sequencing. Such properties can include reduced
reaction rates at one or more steps of the polymerase kinetic cycle, increased
closed polymerase/DNA complex stability, enhanced metal ion coordination,
reduced exonuclease activity, decreased branching fractions, and the like.
Polymerases that exhibit branching fractions that are less than the branching
fractions of the polymerases from which they were derived, or branching
fractions that are less than about 25% for a phosphate-labeled nucleotide
analog, are also provided. Also provided are nucleic acids which encode the
polymerases with the aforementioned phenotypes, as well as methods of using
such polymerases to make a DNA or to sequence a DNA template.

**More Details**

Following papers and documents may be helpful to understand the technology
better.

[Real-time DNA sequencing from single polymerase molecules](http://classes.ule
th.ca/201001/bchm4000a/Eid_J_Science_2008_sm_DNAPol.pdf)

http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/15/e159.long

http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/15/e159/F2.expansion.html

http://www.pacificbiosciences.com/img/press_release_assets/PacBio_Response_to_
Helicos_Complaint_090110_final.pdf

