---
title: A New and Efficient Method to Help Base-calling from Nanopore Electrical Signals
tags: []
categories:
- blog
---
Accurate base-calling is the step in nanopore sequencing with possibly the
most room for improvement. The base-calling from raw electrical signals
requires multiple steps - calling the 'events' implying something passing
through the pore or not, segmenting those events and finally assigning
nucleotide bases to them.
<!--more-->

Although the electrical signals from Oxford Nanopore sequencers can be
accessed from various early access participants, the fully automated
segmentation program of the company is kept as proprietary. Readers interested
in analyzing the raw electrical signals to see whether they can improve the
quality of analysis will find a new paper by reader gasstationwithoutpumps
useful.

[Segmentation of Noisy Signals Generated By a
Nanopore](http://biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/early/2015/01/23/014258.full.pdf)

> Nanopore-based single-molecule sequencing techniques exploit ionic current
steps produced as biomolecules pass through a pore to reconstruct properties
of the sequence. A key task in analyzing complex nanopore data is discovering
the boundaries between these steps, which has traditionally been done in
research labs by hand. We present an automated method of analyzing nanopore
data, by detecting regions of ionic current corresponding to the translocation
of a biomolecule, and then segmenting the region. The segmenter uses a divide-
and-conquer method to recursively discover boundary points, with an
implementation that works several times faster than real time and that can
handle low-pass filtered signals.

Here is briefly what they do -

> Boundary points are identified by our segmenter one at a time using a
recursive algorithm. We start by considering the entire event as a single
segment, then consider each possible boundary to break it into two segments.
To avoid edge effects and ensure that all segments have at least a minimum
duration, only potential boundaries more than the minimum segment length from
the ends of the segment are considered.

Each possible boundary is scored using a log-likelihood function (Eq. 1). If
the maximal score is above a threshold, the segment is split and the two
subsegments are recursively segmented. The recursion terminates either when
the segment to split is less than twice the minimum segment length or no score
within the segment exceeds the threshold.

The codes are available freely from [this github
page](https://github.com/jmschrei/PyPore), which also includes a lot of
information on the algorithm -

> This process for detecting and segmenting events in nanopore signals should
run in real time; either segmenting a stream of data as it comes in or quickly
segmenting an event shortly after its completion. To test the speed of the
algorithm, the event detector was implemented in Python and the segmenter was
implemented in Cython, a language that allows the efficiency of C within
Python. **The current implementation is designed to segment full events and is
available at the first authors public github page.**

